[Music]
you probably know the difference between
a station wagon and a hatchback right
well how about a land delay and a brow
mmm-hmm yeah didn't think so in today's
episode we're taking a look at all the
different car Styles out there
big boys small boys pointy boys
everything in between we're gonna give
you the tools to identify different body
styles examine how they've evolved over
time and get to the bottom of why
they're called what they're called we're
gonna keep this video to passenger
vehicles okay because commercial
vehicles motorcycles vans and trucks
could be their own episodes entirely but
today it's all about cars I want to give
a huge thanks to keeps we're sponsoring
this episode of wheelhouse no one really
talks about it but it's a fact that two
out of three guys will experience some
form of male pattern baldness by the
time they're 35 I have what my mom has
described as wonderfully thick and
beautiful hair but who knows how long
these luscious launches are gonna last
I'm actually kind of nervous when it
comes to hair loss prevention is key and
now thanks the keeps I can maintain all
the hair I already have and prevent hair
loss without even going to the doctor I
can just visit a doctor online they
prescribed hair loss prevention
medication and it's delivered right to
my doorstep every three months and keeps
us super affordable too they offer the
only two fda-approved generic hair loss
products out there you may have tried
them before but never at this low of a
price if you're ready to take action and
prevent hair loss today head on over to
keeps calm / wheelhouse 50 or click the
link in the description for see 50% off
your first order that's K EEP s.com /
wheelhouse and the number 50
thank you keeps support to companies
that support donut and take care of your
hair now back to the show
okay so let's dive in with the car style
most people are familiar with the sedan
the main features of a conventional
sedan are four doors a three box
configuration a closed body meaning a
fixed roof and the ability to
comfortably see four or five passengers
between two rows sedans get their name
from this cool ass way to roll into a
party we lists human powered
contraptions have been around forever
and there
called something different all over the
world but in Britain in the 1630s a
sophisticated version emerged called a
sedan chair or just a sedan
some people think sedans were named
after the French town of sedan but most
of my etymologist homies think it simply
derives from the italian verb
Sudheer meaning to sit there are
differing opinions about who first used
the word sedan in reference to a car
body some credited to the Studebaker 4
and 6 models which were marketed as
sedans in 1912 others attributed to
speed well a short-lived auto
manufacturer based in Dayton Ohio who in
1911 used sedan to describe their new
closed body two-door car sedans are some
of the most recognizable cars of the
modern age sedans are so ubiquitous that
before Australia and New Zealand adopted
the term they simply called sedans cars
this brings me to our next car style the
or the coupe or the coupe a depending on
how you pronounce it I say coupe because
I'm a red-blooded American I can't say
words like Tudor and because coupe a
sounds like a to pay for your car and
that just makes me that makes me itchy
because we hives just thinking about it
like sedans coupes have a fixed roof and
a three box configuration but our
sporty-er and more compact with two
doors and a sloping or truncated rear
roofline like a lot of car terms the
word coupe comes from our horse-drawn
carriage predecessors stemming from the
French verb Kupe meaning to cut the
gup-a was a type of clipped carriage
that seated two instead of four with its
rear facing seats essentially cut off
hence the name the coupe body style has
also given way to many variations as its
evolved the sportiest of the already
sporty coupes is the Berlinetta
introduced in the 1930s and popularized
by ferrari in the 1950s on the other end
of the spectrum is the business coupe
which had massive trunk space in lieu of
a backseat they became super popular
with travelling salesmen everyone knows
the deuce coupe and who could forget the
Cozy Coupe sedans and coupes may seem
very different so how is the line
between them gone so blurred well you
can think car makers forgetting willy
frickin nilly with their naming
conventions in the second half of the
20th century the confusion started once
manufacturers released coupes with a two
and two body style that is to proper
seats up front with two tiny little
seats in the back then in the early
2000s car makers were like oh this whole
two-and-two thing not confusing enough
for you well check out these new
four-door cars that we're gonna call
coupes because we love chaos and nothing
matters Mercedes had their cls-class
Mazda had their rx-8 with the suicide
doors on the back these quad coupes are
at the heart of an age-old debate can
you have a four-door coupe and a
two-door sedan or does it defeat the
purpose of terms altogether you know
what I'm gonna say I'm gonna say yeah it
does why use words if you're gonna take
away their meaning that's messed up
I'm looking at you BMW let's take a look
at the four-door BMW x6 with its sleek
roofline you can see why it's marketed
as a sports activity coupe but that cars
as much of a coupe as dr. Phil is a real
doctor yeah he's not a doctor
let's move on to the station wagon also
known as an estate car unlike the three
box design of the sedan in the coupe
station wagons have a long body - two
box configuration this means its
passengers and cargo areas are in one
joining cabin with the rear tailgate
hinged to allow for easy access to all
that junk in the trunk
the names station wagon and a state car
harken back to these vehicles original
uses in the early 1900s which was to
transport travelers and their luggage
between railway stations and country
estates
so station wagons actually began as
commercial vehicles before making their
way into suburban life fancy that these
first generation station wagons are a
great example of early custom work
because it's not like you could just
purchase one off the lot in 1910 cab
drivers with Ford Model T's looking for
more cargo space would have independent
coachbuilders produce custom wooden
bodies for their existing chassis
these converted wood-bodied Model T's
were known as Woody's eventually car
makers got wise and started making their
own station wagons the first one
assembled on a manufacturers production
line was the 1923 star for model C
station wagon pretty dang cute right as
time went on manufacturers improved upon
wooden bodies and replace them with
steel the 1935 Chevy Suburban was the
first all steel station wagon body and
by the early 50s most other companies
churning out station wagons had followed
suit station wagon and the state models
sold well in the 60s and 70s but were
eventually eclipsed by other family
style cars in the 80's and 90's like the
minivan and a crossover SUV related to
the station wagon is one of my personal
favorites the Shooting Brake now all my
carriage heads out there will know that
a Shooting Brake was originally a
horse-drawn wagon used to cart around
shooting parties along with all their
guns and ammo and I imagine alcohol this
is back in the 1890s but shooting breaks
eventually came to mean a body style
that combines the station wagon and the
coupe this was especially prevalent in
the 60s and 70s companies offered these
kind of two-door elongated sport coupes
like the 65 Aston Martin db5 Shooting
Brake
other companies offered the same body
style but didn't call it a shooting
break like the Reliant's Emmitt
our GTE which sounds like a car from GTA
this style of car kind of disappeared
for a while but made a comeback in the
2000s one of the coolest and weirdest
looking of the bunch was nicknamed the
clown shoe is the BMW z3 m coupe and you
can see why challenging the conventional
definition the later 2012 mercedes-benz
cls-class Shooting Brake had four doors
instead of two oh and the more recent
shooting brakes of the 2018 Porsche
Panamera sport Turismo and Ferraris
first production four-wheel drive model
the FF people go H for the FF myself
included also the the Panamera Turismo
and that Mercedes just call them wagons
guys come on it's nearly impossible to
talk about station wagons without
bringing up the hatchback named for its
hatch type rear door that opens upwards
lots of early hatchbacks were actually
marketed as small station wagons like
PMC's 1959 countryman version of the
Aston 840 Farina predecessor - one of
the most iconic hot hatches in history
the Renault 5 turbo the hatchback design
actually dates back to the 1930s with
the sit on 11 CV commercial but the term
hatchback didn't appear until the 70s
when the cars really took off as popular
small utilitarian vehicles especially in
Europe may be the most well known
hatchback is the Volkswagen Golf
designed by the juggernaut genius
Giorgetto Giugiaro
who in 1999 was named car designer of
the century the mark 1 golf hit the
scene in 1974 as VW's next big thing
since the beetle before long it became
standard for car companies to release
hatchback versions of their most popular
models the hatch door style has even
made its way into luxury vehicles like
the BMW 5 Series Gran Turismo and the
Audi a7 if you've ever heard a hatchback
referred to as a three-door or five-door
it's because the hatch is considered its
own door in addition to the 2 or 4
existing passenger doors makes sense
that being said what we see nowadays are
more often the five-door versions
especially in the u.s. we just don't
like small cars for some reason even
though our cities are quite packed in
parkings a nightmare
okay big stretch now oh because we're
about to talk limos the luxurious
lengthy limousine is popular with
presidents celebrities and horny
teenagers go on a prom it's driven by a
chauffeur with a partition between the
driver and the passenger compartments
limos and stretch limos are made by
converting the bodies of existing models
in the US the most common conversions
are cars like the town car the Navigator
the Cadillac XTS and the Escalade the
Chrysler 300 and the Hummer h2
entrepreneurial car nuts have even
converted semis into the biggest
functional limos in the world but the
longest limo of all time would have to
be the 100 foot long 26 wheeled American
dream just look at this honker now look
again and this time notice that there's
a freaking helicopter on the back of it
it was created in 1992 by this dude Jay
orberg who was known for building movie
Cars like the DeLorean and back to the
future and the American Dream was both
on inspiring and completely impractical
there's virtually undriveable and
eventually fell into disrepair but not
before garnering the Guinness Book of
World Records title of world's longest
car well done Jay like coupe the word
limousine is all wrapped up in carriage
culture it originally comes to the name
of the French region limousine where the
shepherds wore a distinctive type of
cloak with a raised hood the roof that
extended over the driver's seat on early
limousines resembled that hood which is
how its got its name originally limos
without a hood over the driver were
called Browns Cadillac was the first to
make a motorized braum in 1916 but like
most cars in this video the meaning of
brown has changed since the early days
take the classic Cadillac Brown land
boat from the 1970s a perfect example of
Brougham being used on a car that
doesn't actually feature this driver
exposed passenger and closed body style
it Braham actually means in the 1970s
80s and 90s car companies would use
braum to specify an upper trim level of
a particular model Chrysler did it with
its New Yorker Ford did it with its Ford
Torino so when it comes to car styles
the name Brougham can be a little tricky
but here's one that couldn't be any more
straightforward the Micro car
it's a card that's micro these tiny
vehicles have little baby engines
generally 700 cubic centimeters or
smaller many of which were originally
designed for motorcycles it's for that
reason that many early micro cars didn't
even have the capability to go backwards
micro cars can either be four-wheeled
like the BMW Isetta or three-wheeled
like the Micra stud the micro the peel
p50 micro cars cropped up after World
War two initially in Germany and the UK
as an alternative to the motorcycle with
better weather protection one of the
first to appear was the 1949 Bond mini
car this looks like something you'd buy
your rich-ass kid it only weighed about
300 pounds used a mere 50 cc engine one
of the rarest micro cars is the 1950s
egg-shaped brooch moped a moped a baby
only 14 of these things were ever
produced and just five of them remain
today but when the mini busted on the
scene in 1959 micro car customers traded
in their one ceders for these roomier
more powerful vehicles that were still
small and affordable in the 90s however
micro cars made a little bit of a
comeback with the itty-bitty smart
fortwo another styling variation that
can dramatically affect the overall look
of a car is the fastback a fastback has
a single unbroken slope from the roof to
the rear bumper that makes the car more
sleek and aerodynamic the precursor to
modern-day fast facts are the teardrop
shaped cars of the 1930s and by the
early 40s you can get a fastback body
style from nearly every domestic
manufacturer fash backs are usually
coupes but can be sedans like the old VW
bugs an early fastback example is this
stunning Bugatti Type 57 Atlantic an
extremely rare car there's only a few of
them in the world one of them changed
hands in 2010 for 40 million dollars
later fast backs include the classic 67
Mustang like the Bullitt Mustang the
mark 1 Plymouth Barracuda
Makia stinger is a fastback and of
course the Porsche 911 which has
continuously maintained its fastback
appearance from its debut in 1963 to
today very impressive fast facts can get
confused with notch backs but the term
notch back actually implies a horizontal
trunk lid it's usually reserved for
distinguishing from fastback models of
the
car-like in the 1970s there is a Chevy
Vega which came in both then there's the
cam back also known as the cam tail or
ke tail this automotive styling feature
evolved out of an early need for
aerodynamic improvement on cars a cam
back slopes downward like a Fastback
but then abruptly cuts vertically down
it's like it's it's it's like a fastback
with the butt cut off most common cam
back out there has to be the Toyota
Prius but the coolest is probably the
Shelby Cobra Daytona Coupe the design
developed and named after German
aerodynamicists Munda bald cam in the
1930s was found to minimize drag reduce
fuel consumption and provide more
vehicle stability at higher speeds it
was adding a cam back to the racecar
that finally allowed Ford surpassed
Ferrari at Lamont notable cam backs
since then include the Ferrari 250 GTO
of the 60s the Datsun 240z
and technically Tesla's latest model why
near that car body that's narrow at the
center with a rounded front end and
death voluptuous back end I'm not
talking about the peanut Mobil I'm
talking about what you'd wash that big
rock-hard peanut down with a refreshing
bottle of coke coke bottle styling can
either be accomplished by pinching the
waist of a car or adding more pronounced
curves over the front and back wheel
arches
unlike other styles based on horse-drawn
carriages the coke bottle design was
inspired by aeronautics and the pinched
waisted fuselage of supersonic jets the
styling was named for its resemblance to
a classic contoured coke bottles laying
on its side it's not a far stretch
actually seeing as both the bottle and
the car style were developed by
industrial design legend Raymond Loewy
like I knew it was similar but I didn't
realize the same guy the man designed
everything from cars to toasters to
stamps to jukeboxes to coffee shops to
airplane interiors that's called range
people he introduced the stylish new
coke bottle body in 1962 on the
Studebaker Avanti gran turismo Chevy
followed a year later with its 63
Corvette Stingray and dramatis sized the
styling in their 68 Corvette it got even
more widespread in the 70s as Nissan
Mitsubishi and
Kota offered coke-bottle styling on
multiple models a more recent example is
the Dodge Challenger which was also one
of the first coke-bottle style cards
back in the 70s and frankly my favorites
I'm so glad they kept it for this for
the the current one a whole different
class of cars are convertibles if I've
learned one thing about convertibles
it's that you've got to keep some
sunscreen in the glove box I've learned
two things about convertibles it's that
there are so many different names for
convertibles first let's get the basics
down okay a convertible is a car with a
roof that can be folded down or removed
most are two-door models although
four-door convertibles do exist you can
get a hardtop convertible whose
retractable roof is made of steel
aluminum or plastic or a soft top made
of materials like vinyl or canvas the
age-old question is though what's the
difference between a convertible and a
Cabriolet and honestly it's not much
Cabriolet is essentially just a European
term for convertible it comes from the
name of you guessed it and old carriage
which had a top that could be pulled up
or left down depending on the weather
but both terms can be used
interchangeably and only nerds will get
mad about it you know what to settle on
once and for all let's just call them
convert relays okay rolls right out the
tongue then they then you have the
Roadster also known as a spider or
spider with a Y which is pretty much the
same thing as a convertible slash
Cabriolet just fancier sounding
technically a true roadster has two
seats and no whether production
whatsoever the terms roadster and Spyder
can be used interchangeably but they
have very different origins okay
roadster comes from an old american term
for a good travelin horse or spider with
a y on the other hand gets its name from
don't worry it's not actually yes it is
a carriage from the 1800s and it looked
very spidery this two-door carriage
perched high on some abnormally large
wheels was also called a Phaeton it was
faster and more dangerous than others at
the time and therefore used more for
sport than actual travel modern-day
roadsters have kept alive this emphasis
on sportiness and style over safety and
functionality many original roadsters
and spiders eventually evolved to have a
room
and window options which led to the
terms roadster Spyder convertible and
Cabrio all kind of meshing together and
then the fact that Spyder is spelled
with an i and a y just adds to the
confusion a good rule of thumb to keep
those straight is that if a car is
Italian it's almost always spelled with
an eye and that's because Italians don't
have the letter Y in their alphabet
[Music]
another class of open-top two-seat
sports cars is the barqueta see how it
kind of looks like a skiff or a
speedboat unsurprising since barqueta is
italian for a little boat a barqueta is
like a roadster in that it's compact and
truly topless but instead of a full
windshield
it has a short transparent wind
deflector which I know sounds like the
same thing as a windshield but it's not
there's already a lot of convertible s
cars and we haven't even gotten to the
semi convertibles yet like the land
delay with a name like that you best
believe it used to be a carriage okay
opposite in the braum though where the
driver was exposed in the passengers
covered a LAN delay has a fixed roof
over the driver's portion but an
adjustable convertible top over the back
for the passengers they often have a
partition that separates the driver from
the passengers similar to limousines but
these guys really never became popular
as a daily vehicle these were the kind
of cars that political figures would use
that political what processions but that
didn't really last due to security
concerns a way cooler and more prevalent
semi convertible is the targa top it's
it's sort of like a convertible coupe
the back portion of the roof is fixed
but there's a removable or collapsible
panel over the front seats even though
it wasn't the first car to have
removable roof panels the 1966 Porsche
911 Targa popularized a style it was
named for the Targa Florio a Sicilian
Road race that Porsche had recently done
very well at all types of cars can have
target tops but because Porsche
trademarked name manufacturers just
can't call it that the nd Miata ahrefs
have a target style roof as well as a c4
Corvette some people think that you can
interchange tee top and target top but
there's actually a bit of a difference
because T tops have a rigid non
removable bar running from the front to
the back
called the t-bar arguably the shakiest
of car shapes is the wedge car
[Music]
some of the most iconic pointy boys like
the DeLorean dmc-12 the Lancia Stratos
and the Lamborghini Countach emerged in
the 70s and 80s true wedge cars were
more futuristic concept cars or
experimental racing cars that weren't
really practical though a few of them
did make it to production the
grandfather of the wedge car is the same
guy who designed the mark 1 golf the man
of many G's Giorgetto Giugiaro my back
hurts now it seems insane to go from
something as cool as a wedge car to
something as aggressively normal as an
SUV but that's what we're gonna do and
suv's defining features are raised
ground clearance a higher ride height
four wheel drive and off-roading
capabilities beyond its function as a
passenger car they sometimes have two
doors like the old Bronco or blazer or
four doors like most SUVs today there
was a time when SUVs were produced with
a body-on-frame style where the separate
body was mounted on a chassis of a light
truck this method differentiates SUVs
from crossovers which are smaller but
similar vehicles with less off-road
capabilities and get better fuel economy
which use unibody construction and a car
based platform a perfect crossover
example is the mid-90s Toyota rav4 which
really opened this type of vehicle up to
the market segment but now that SUVs are
frequently being produced with unibody
construction the delineation is kind of
moot and SUV has basically become a
catch-all term that includes crossovers
alright so that's it those are the
different kinds of car bodies I've got
for you today let me know in the
comments if there's one that I didn't
really cover and that you'd like to hear
more about like trucks guys make sure
you subscribe to done it we put out a
show every day it's pretty crazy
we're all going a little insane because
of it that's fine we do it for you
follow donut at donut media follow me at
Nolan J Sykes on Instagram and Twitter
be kind see you next time